Order of battle by Rakust Pulleydriven, first-migrant militia commander, The Folded Banner.

253 Galena.  Responded to report of a kobold thief from Strugufusrulgin.
Became military commander and leader of the Walled Systems, and chased
off the unwelcome intruder.  Also about to fight an animated remnant of the
first two embarks, a two-humped camel skeleton, which interrupted work.


Order of battle by Shorast Coloredmined, embark expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Limestone.  Camel still disruptive.  

Sandstone.  Skeleton starting to kill dogs, so I will lead a citizens’-militia
squad to kill it.


Order of battle by Ber Paintsqueezed, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Sandstone.  The fighting isn’t over, and the poultry are taking
the brunt of it.  Disgusting purple clouds of rot—let our refuse clutter
the green grass!  Found Mebzuth dead, no ghosts yet.

Timber.  Kulet will command militia and squad of other military migrants,
now only Sarvesh.  Need to establish barracks, probably at end of
copper vein.


Order of battle by Vabôk Flukecobalt, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Timber.  Edëm went berserk and killed Ber with his pick.
Edëm killed Ïngiz, so that’s sorted.  Ber killed Kulet, and Edëm
killed Sarvesh, so no need for barracks.  The merchants’
hammerdwarf Inod Doortrenches and the marksdwarf Ùshrir 
took down vomiting and retching Edëm with gut shots.

Opal.  The ghost appeared of the embark recruit Deler.  Mebzuth has
also risen to haunt us.


Order of battle by Likot Tombshoved, third-migrant militia commander, The Folded Banner.

254 Hematite.  Set up a yearlong training schedule for 2 of the 3 soldiers
of the Walled System, dug a barracks, and told them to train there.
	The migrant ranger, jack-of-all-trades, and bone doctor will
join the earlier-migrant wood cutter, blacksmiths, and hunter in an
inactive marksdwarf squad, the Diamond Vises.

Galena.  Set out both the melee and the marksdwarf squad to scare off
a kobold thief.  Bolts, spear, mace, and wrestling mutilated the enemy,
and got back to work and military training.
 
Sandstone.  Likot Ceilingfield is a hammerdwarf.  Litast Trusted-
bolted, Ònul Battlegilds, and Ònul Boltstire are marksdwarves.
	Created a new squad, Laborious Anguish, for metal-clad melee
fighters.  Likot Ceilingfield, hammerdwarf leads the combined arms of
Vucar Crystalstraps, axedwarf, and Aban Merchantblockades, macedwarf.
Vucar is also the chief medical dwarf and diagnostician, so he will be
traded out as soldier or medical dwarf as the opportunity arises.
	Trained 1 male hunting dog for hunter Likot Agesseals, and
2 female war dogs for each of the squads.  This leaves 1 male dog
and 1 female dog free to breed and be adopted.
	Plan a drowning chamber for invasions.
	The siege engineer now leads the marksdwarf squad instead of
the metalsmith.  Logem will head a new marksdwarf squad, the Quick
Gates.
	Murdered Kulet haunts us.

Timber.  Rakust and Ònul reanimated.  Ordered coffins and slabs,
and the military to attack them after it drives off the goblin thieves.
Rakust’s right upper arm earned the name "Braveryflying".
Both melee squads are going after the upper right arm, and then
Rakust’s skeleton, while the marksdwarves hit the third goblin thief
and then the skeleton.  The name of our necromancer enemy is
Bini Rankphlegm, a human, according to a soap maker.  Not sure what
he expects an undead mussel shell to do, other than scare the fishery
workers.  Right, one punch and it’s shattered.  That’s everything
deanimated, now.  The mechanic Aban has trouble grasping, lye maker
Fath is also faint and cannot stand, but overall those battles turned
out well.

Slate.  Axedwarf Medtob to 1M Walled Systems, transfers mace to
3M Helmed Duties, to balance weapons.  4M Tin Decisions under
Fikod Helmcrazy (because wrestler etc) uses sword, mace (Zuglar),
and hammer (Zaneg).  Both squads of 3 now set to train two at a time.
2R Quick Gates picked up Kadôl, and 3R Complex Boards drafted
Stukos.  Lòr to Second Ranged.

Obsidian.  Killed another goblin thief.

255 Granite.  Walled Systems (1M=First Melee) under Likot Tombshoved
uses spear, sword, and mace; Laborious Anguish (2M) under Likot Ceiling-
field uses hammer, sword, and mace; and Helmed Duties (3M) under Urvad
Pastlanced uses sword and axe (so far).  Split marksdwarves into Quick
Gates (2R=Second Ranged) under Logem Yellsboat (because wrestler), and
Complex Boards (3R)  under Minkot Galleydoors, each allowed 250 bolts
to the hunters’ 100.  Marksdwarf squads have equivalent competence.
Need 2 more quivers: slaughter 2 roosters.
  Athel Bellmansion, swordsdwarf, will replace the chief
medical dwarf in 2M Laborious Anguish.  Vucar is now led by Urvad
Pastlanced, swordsdwarf and in the inactive (only 2) 3M Helmed Duties.
Zas Crystalpaddles joins the Quick Gates.  He and the other mechanic
will help secure the sazirkib [bridge-net].

Slate.  Kulet Lancercover’s partial skeleton started rotting inside
the shelter, which apparently killed his ghost.  Sarvesh Tomedrum’s
ghost is also dead.

Felsite.  Dwarves insist on running into the caverns, including fools
with babies, so send in all but the accursed to wipe out all the cave
swallow blowgunners.  The shifting fortunes of battle now activates
Third Melee and inactivates Second Melee, waiting for a migrant.
	Send 2R Quick Gates and 3R Complex Boards against a goblin thief.
They can use the target practice, since they don’t get other training.
	Vucar needs to spend his time diagnosing, relieved of military duty.
Athel will take his place in the 3M Helmed Duties, so 2M needs 2 more.
Also released Litast Trustedbolted from marksdwarf militia duty.
Moved Lòr Earthstrike from 2R to 3R.
	Litast is playing at being a hammerdwarf as well as a marksdwarf.
Better for his broker career that he remain on standby in the militia.
	Stukos is also unconscious.

Hematite.  Start sending in the military to deal with wild animals.
Especially the troglodyte Sundertome in the cavern.  Sent 1M, 3M,
and 4M.  Ranged won’t be as much good down there, with all the
pillars.  They made short work of the troglodytes, with the honors
going to the axedwarves.  Send 2R and 3R after the giant bat and
cave swallow, since they can fly.  Couldn’t get to cave swallow.
The giant bat Parchedphrase took out Stukos trying to wrestle.
Send in 1M, 3M, and 4M as well.  Send the marksdwarves back out
to hit the goblin snatcher.  The ranged squads took out the giant bat,
with the kill going to the swordsdwarf.  Set one ranged squad each
against the kobold thief and the goblin snatcher.  Send one melee
squad against each of three troglodytes.  Now both ranged against
another kobold thief.  Athel died to the cave crocodile Earbattle—
sending all melee squads to kill it, with Likot taking Athel’s place
in 3M.  Also lost Urvad.  Send 2R and 3R to help finish cave crocodile.
Second notable kill in succession for sworsdwarf Dôbar Crystalaxes,
who will now lead 3M Helmed Duties.  1M inactive, waiting for soldier.
Sent 2R and 3R against a trogdolyte, but the militia commander took
care of it.  Nothing important to attack at the moment.

Malachite.  Send 3M and 4M after a gorlak.  Outrunning them,
so activating 2R and 3R.  Dôbar, sword of Helmed Duties, got it.
Her squad calls her “Cavebane” for her notable cavern kills.
Spread out squads among half a dozen more troglodytes.
“Medtrog”, axe of Walled Systems, enjoys hacking them up.
	Migrants: Assign Bëmbul to 1M to bring it back up to strength
and activate it.  Assign Id to 2R and Zasit to 3R.
	A troglodyte got a name, Crowddriver, by killing Litast
Trustedbolted.  Sent 1M and 4M tokill it, but likely the war dog will
finish her off first.  Likot hammered its brains to mush, called
“Zombie” from three dwarf zombie kills.
	Released Degël from duty as a marksdwarf, which keeps our
too-few doctors safer.
	Helped Vabôk build as few walls as possible to isolate the
underground still and plant pile.
	A giant mole is making itself obnoxious.  Anything giant,
send in all the squads: 1M, 3M, 4M, 2R, 3R.  Overkill: the swords-
dwarf captain was enough.

Galena.  Ordered bronze armor (mail shirt, breast plate, helm)
and weapons (spear, sword, crossbow).
	Datan is berserk, send entire military: 1M, 3M, 4M, 2R and 3R.
Killed by dogs and Likot Agesseals of 3R Complex Boards.
	Some buzzards are being annoying, stealing fish, so send out
marksdwarves (2R and 3R) for target practice.

Limestone.  Release marksdwarves from buzzard practice after we got
3 of them.
	Scramble 2R and 3R for a kobold thief: very effective.
1M, 3M, and 4M to the cavern for the troll Alliedenjoys, who killed
herbalist Lorbam Howlseals.

Sandstone.  Cavebane took down the troll alone, and recovered her
uninjured baby.
	Three competent migrants will form their own new melee squad:
Lolor Tributelance, axedwarf leads 5M “Armored Blocks of Lancing”
(or “Armored Lancers”), with Rigòth Steeltested, macedwarf, and
Ingish Muscledikes, swordsdwarf.  Let the self-taught fighter and
wrestler Rigòth Idolblockades lead 2M “Laborious Anguish” against
minor problems; or, eventually be the captain of the guard, once we
dig a noble burrow.
	All melee squads have three members, and train all year in the
barracks with at least 2 present for sparring.  This allows us to get
some work out of the one free member each month, and refuse
hauling outside helps prevent cave adaptation.
	Assigned migrant Urist Torchflanked to 2R Quick Gates, and
Ïngiz Dentlances to 3R Complex Boards.
	Spotted a giant cave spider Teachcleanses in the cavern.
Send all squads: 1M, 3M, 4M, 5M, and 2R and 3R.  New 5M captain
Lolor Tributelance hacked it up after it bit to death Elite Wrestler
Ïngiz Dentlances and Wrestler Zasit Scholarboats.
	Transferred marksdwarf Urist from 2R (6) to 3R (4) to even
the sizes of the squads.

Timber.  Raw adamantine!  Praise the miners!  The best armor and
edged weapons!
	Werelizard spotted in the river!  All squads to battle: 1M, 3M,
4M, 5M, 2R, and 3R.  Killed Bim Foldedquake, changed into human
and ran away.
	An ambush of six goblins followed the caravan!  All squads
to battle: 1M, 3M, 4M, 5M, 2R, and 3R.  Killed two, drove away the rest.
Also a goblin thief.  Also the dead are walking, four score elf corpses.
Retreating into the fortress and closing all the drawbridges.
	Assemble military in barracks, since we have no seal on the
sortie tunnel.  Dig out stairs so maybe they can’t come down.
	Send the children and mothers with babies to the hospital and
shut the drawbridge.
	Pull all the levers of burrows.
	Drawbridge of shelter shut.
	Ignore refuse from outside!  Ignore refuse entirely.
	Position military between sortie gate and rest of fortress.
	Shut the hospital—hospital bridge not done!  Relocate children
to the cavern shelter.
	255-143-seige: As a stream of refugee animals and civilian
dwarves retreat into the fortress from the surface, the remaining
military of The Folded Banner stand between the barracks, open to
the surface, and the children, babies and mothers fleeing deep into
the shelter by the cavern.  90 elf corpses are on the march to
slaughter every living dwarf.


Sealed traders in the depot.  Sealed two of three access points.
Remaining one is deconstruction of the stairs by barracks, or linking
the trigger in the barracks.  Send mechanic “Ian” into the barracks,
and miners.
	The military is frittering away their lives one by one picking
up equipment on the surface.
	Seal up the cavern shelter.  Another lever that doesn’t work.
Built a wall of nearby marble to seal off the cavern shelter.
Iden is in the cavern shelter with a pick.  Momuz is in the first
shelter with a pick.
	Everyone except soldiers on station smooth all stone of
shelters to prepare them for engraving.  Mine connection between
shelters, and open shelter to trade depot.
	Insanity begins in the upper shelter.  A berserk animal
dissector was killed by a miner, but not before killing baby Dastot.
	No military left by 255 Moonstone 16.
	Set the broker to be someone in the upper shelter?
	Cog gets a strange mood.  Good luck with that.
	Really need to connect the shelters, running out of food
in the lower shelter.  Opening the cavern would save them from
starving but expose them to the cavern and the stairs to the
elf corpses.  Central staircases suck.
	Will neither miner mine?  No, melancholy instead.
`	Vampire thinks it would be good to make some picks.
Both for the starving dwarves and herself, no doubt.
	69 dwarves.
	We were right to stay out of the cavern, we hear something big
lumbering around out there.
	Actually try to connect bridge to lever, since the FB is a
building destroyer.  Dwarves in lower cavern shelter dying of thirst.
Apparently, also being open to a forgotten beast is resolving the
undead siege throughout the fortress.  The FB is suffering, so the
two problems look to be cancelling out each other?  Looks like the FB
broke the seige, though not all the undead are put down.


Postmortem: The drawbridges to the outside, by the trade depot and
upper shelter, and the interior ones that isolated the same, worked to
keep out the invaders, even when they got into the fortress.  Tunnels
between the shelter and the trade depot were able to be reopened
because they were not connected to the central stairwell.  If the
connection had been behind its own drawbridge, it would probably also
have worked, which is an argument for the type of bi-directional
drawbridges that were planned at the bend in the central staircase by
the first cavern layer.
	Workshop areas are not shelters, and cannot support more than
the dwarves who work there.  A proper shelter must have a lot of food
and drink, and picks, to tunnel new connections to safe chambers, and
fight piecemeal to reclaim the fortress.  The layout used below the
first farm is fine.  The shelter should be a stand-alone storeroom,
with its own drawbridges functional.  If a shelter is in stone, then it
can be smoothed and engraved during seiges to keep refugees busy.
It doesn’t need to have a cistern.  The shelter contains a sample of
everything needed to establish, in the worst case, another fortress
inside the mountain.  It may also have another level with more drink
and prepared food, dormitory, hospital, and dining area.
	The seige got in because there was an opening to the surface
that was not sealed.  This should never be the case after we first
strike the earth, since we can always build a bridge and get it
working before we breach the surface.  As an inferior alternative,
we could have at least built a wall before we breach the surface,
if we didn’t want a permanent feature, or wanted to work on the
drawbridges after breaching the surface.
	Further, once the refugees from the surface finished coming in,
the military went out one-by-one to pick up equipment and get
slaughtered individually.  This, even after refuse was set to be
ignored outside, and then ignored altogether.  This idiocy needs
careful examination and avoidance in future, by forbidding everything
outside.
	The central staircase allowed the invaders all access to passages
between chambers, which shut down the productive capacity of the fort,
and completely undermined the intent of the network.
	The forgotten beast was not adequately isolated against:
we should not put any production capacity into the cavern until an
area is already isolated from the cavern.
	All that said, the forgotten beast did a nice job killing the
invading force, so we should establish tunnels between each
cavern and the surface to loose our enemies on each other.
	Reanimating biomes and necromancer neighbors suck.
As far as I could tell, the necromancer himself never showed up
on the map to kill.
	The animals scattered, keeping the undead busy while the
dwarves got to shelter.
