aban avuzsazirmafol tunur … kib saziradilîton kezkïg ugoshódkelid
shatagistrath … kirondatanavuz ustosteshkad angngotololum
―Bomonolthîkut fragments

home-mountain book

build mine-bridge-chamber style
net bridge-wall-hall connect hollow-tunnel-metal-rock jewel-cluster
holy-iron-mine anger-price red-ghost-disperse

We build in mine, bridge, chamber tradition.  A network of [draw?]
bridge-walled halls connected by tunnels of ore and jewel clusters.
The hallowed hematite vein is the toll of (our) angers, where we lay
to rest our angry undead.


Burrow addresses in the mine-bridge-chamber style,
an essay by a human scholar of dwarven archæology:

“Dwarves speak of location relative to gates, entry points, the first
space where an area was entered, which provide passage back to the
place they were before.  For a fortress, the first gate is the place
near where the wagon stopped, where they first struck the earth.
For a level of the fortress, the level gate is the location of the
first stairway down or up to the level, or the entry point first
carved from outside.  In avuzsazirmafol, they further name their
burrows by the ore of the vein that leads to a frame/chamber/burrow,
since to dwarves every mineral, and especially metal, has a strong
and distinct feel, appearance, smell, taste, and sound when struck.
If there are more than one vein of the same economic stone, or if the
level is completely composed of it (eg, marble by caverns) then they
distinguish them by relative direction to or from the mountainhome,
and left or right from the path towards the mountainhome.

So an address inside the fortress is composed of the level of the
fortress down from the first gate, the name of the vein that leads to
the frame/chamber/burrow, and (if necessary) a direction to
distinguish it from another, similar vein.  Since the human overseer
doesn’t have the same sense of direction, he uses north as “home”,
towards the mountainhome; south as “away”; west as “left” and
east as “right” from that axis.  For long passages through many veins,
replace as many directions as possible with a list of the veins in series.

For example, in this picture of the 4th level of Earthenunited, the
address of the barracks along the upper hematite vein is “4 hematite-
home” (4 hem^), or 4 Hematite North, as we would say.  Proceeding
clockwise: The future frame to the upper right will have the address
“4 galena-right” (4 gal>), or 4 Galena Northeast.  The artifact chamber
is just “4” (4), since it is hard by the gate with no vein between.
The future frame to the lower right will be “4 microcline” (4 mic).
The frame below and slightly left is “4 hematite-away” (4 hemv).
The hospital’s address is “4 copper” (4 cop).  The chamber between
them, part of a burrow that starts upstairs, does not have an address
on this level, since it is not accessible.  Clockwise, the future frames
to the upper left will be “4 galena-left left” (4 gal< <) and “4 galena-
left home” (4 gal< ^ in note-shorthand.)

To get from the lower-right future frame to the upper-left leftmost
future frame, the directions would be “microcline galena-left left”
(mic gal< <).  To get up to the outside farm would be “microcline
galena hematite-home 3” (mic gal hem^ 3), to find and use the stairs
to the third level past the hematite vein.”
