Diary of Shorast Coloredmined, embark expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Granite.  The Folded Banner stopped aside two other wagons. 
Whatever happened to both of them left their animals as skeletons,
and scattered a few of their belongings.  No sign of their bodies,
either dead for burial, or live to take back in chains for deriliction
of duty.
	They barely started to dig out an all-pile below an embark shelter,
and stairs down a water tunnel and cistern.  The simple plans seem sound,
from what we can tell, and there are no unusual fissures or echoes
from the stone, so we’ll continue to set up the embark shelter.

Slate.  Hollowed three levels of shelter burrow.  Started building
workshops and producing items.  Rock mugs for trade.  A small
meeting hall and dining room by the outsiders, and a small dormitory
by the stonedwarves.  Top priority is cistern and well before winter.

Felsite.  Finished meeting hall and dining room.


Diary of Ber Paintsqueezed, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Timber.  Èrith is melancholy.  Ïngiz is berserk.  Kulet couldn’t
handle the hostility around here.

 
Diary of Vabôk Flukecobalt, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Timber.  Rakust was the first to die, my husband rotting in front
of me; since then I revel in this chaos and disorder.  The Mountain-
home diplomat left unhappy, no trade.  More miasma.

Moonstone.  The merchants have been watching us fall apart, and are
leaving soon, as we’ve been unable to set up and staff a trade depot.
Partly my fault I guess, I just found the plans.  Èrith slipped away.

Opal.  We should build a tradecraft burrow and floodable approach,
since shelter is too cluttered.  But for now we just grow food and
drink and hold on until more come.

254 Granite.  The small dining room, covered in chicks, no longer a
meeting area.  Plan to wall in the pastures and remove upward slopes.
	My daughter Iden Drinkboat arrived with about thirty migrants!

Slate.  Minkot Galleydoors replaces Ùshrir Plankenjoy as record keeper.
	Should create a walled meeting hall/dining area exposed to outside.
Should create a bedroom burrow (levels of a 3x3 array of 3x3 bedrooms)
for those dwarves without workplace bedrooms.
	Dug out the depot level of the tradecraft burrow.  Planned wall
and drawbridge to isolate deramped pastures.  All dwarves busy.
Replaced the trade depot.

Felsite.  Convicted Ïgniz of the murder of Tun, Ïteb, and Mebzuth.
Convicted Ber of the murder of Kulet.  Should farm within walls above
ground, for variety, and because there are many seeds to be had here.

Hematite.  Elves from Aquaneinefa, "The Dabbling Fell", whined that
Ùshrir accidentally offered them the bin the gems were in, and refused
to trade.  More gems for the humans and dwarves, then.  All they had
that we actually needed were bags, to hold seeds.  Broker back to work.
	Digging a deep shaft, down fifty layers, broke into a cavern while
enlarging a marble take.  Plan a drawbridge and controlling lever to
isolate it; upper drawbridges ready as backup.

Malachite.  Constructing a wall around an outside farm, with an inside
connection to the rest of the fort.  Militia is sparring in barracks
slightly smaller than the chamber, to allow storage along the walls.
Dug a little tunnel under the river, to get to the other side.
Unforbid various items, including seeds for more planting, leathers so
Stukos’ strange mood does not end poorly, and corpses for bone crafts.
	Stukos created an artifact giant-bat leather cloak, “Parchdim the
Cross Naughtiness of Roaring”.  Need isolated storage for artifacts,
and other treasure, eventually behind a forbidden artifact door.
For now, turn the center of the mines into a room.

Galena.  Finished drawbridge by cavern, connected lever: we are now
isolated from the cavern.
	The ghost of Ïgniz battered unconscious a six-year-old child
(daughter of Cog and Minkot), and removed her upper left leg,
so it’s time to put him to rest.  Placed many coffins along the red walk,
and ordered slabs.  Dispersed Mebzuth, and Deler just after he rose.
She recuperates in the barracks, watching sparring practice.
	Planned a store for artifact furniture, (siege) ammo, finished goods,
weapons, trap components, and armor, with a lever in the barracks.
	We have enough ore, and few enough trees, that it makes sense
to delve for magma, to power forges and smelters.  Set up a drawbridge
before we delve deeper than the cavern we found.
	Appointed Vucar the chief medical dwarf.

Sandstone.  Datan has been found dead, but we’re not sure why,
in the bed next to Ilral in the barracks, just after stopped work
needing coal.  It’s not good to lose a metalsmith.  Bëmbul is in the
barracks on break.  Likot and Sibrek are individually drilling in
combat practice.  Ilral is resting.  Kulet Smithpeaked has a wide
range of experience, lots of kids, and is looking thirsty despite much
alcohol around, so I think I’ll post her alone to explore the cavern
and find water.
	Secured the vampire Kulet in the cavern.  Gathering wood
(if we give her an axe) and spider webs, she can supply several
industries down in the cavern, passing goods through one of two
chambers: one at a time open to the workshops, and the other open to
the vampire.  Cave spider webs, as a source of silk, should keep busy
the weaver, spinner, and clothier.

Timber.  Digging textile burrow and exchange chambers at cavern.
	A single boulder blocks trade caravan from mountainhome.
Ordered it smoothed out of the way.  If no-one gets to that we could
open another entrance to the trade depot.  They decided to unload
anyway.  Sell gems and rock mugs.  Declare the trade depot a burrow
to get me and the broker there.  Set all miners to stone detailing to
smooth boulder preventing trade.  Finally traded.

Moonstone.  I have a granddaughter from Iden and Thob: Ïteb Savedtraded!
Such a lovely little jewel they baptized to Uzol of jewels.  Fath and Bëmbul
also had their first daughter, Domas Shadowsabre, dedicated to Kodor the
dominant lilac of light, the sun, and day.  Kivish and Deduk had their
first son, Ònul Channeledflicker, also of Uzol.  It’s baby season!

Opal.  I set up a burrow in the hospital for the mothers and babies to
go to when we spot a baby snatcher.  Appropriately enough, the chief
medical dwarf is smoothing the floor of the hospital-in-progress when
he’s not on duty.  I forgot to lift the civilian alert, which is why Ùshrir
and I haven’t left the depot until now.  Fath lye-maker died of infection,
which is exactly why we need a hospital with a dedicated staff, and a
plan for a soap industry.
	Convicted the vampire of murdering Datan.
	Maisma down in the dorm by the stonedwarves as Fath rotted.
With as many idle hands as there are around here, it’s sad no-one got
to her.  Hospital floor smooth, ready to set up.  Iden, Thob, and
little Ïteb get a room in the hospital, since she’s a suturer.

Obsidian.  Hospital smoothed walls and floor, we can start to engrave
the walls to give the injured something to look at, ponder, and study
as they recover.
	After talking to Minkot, we should build another underground
farm below outside, almost-walled-off farm, and a craft level below
the trade depot.
	Due to confusion the area below the hospital was set up to
make clothes, just like the chamber near the cavern.  Ordered a new
area dug above hospital (which is where it could be generally) for
soap-makers (remember to limit non-hospital levels with access
to its well).


255 Granite.  Should plan a smoothed and engraved burrow with meeting
halls of dining room, statue garden and zoo.  Since this will be a
common location for dwarves to gather, it should have its own water.
So, it could be below the hospital.  Or, grant chairs and tables to
bedrooms, but then there would be no parties.  To honor avuzuthar
[mine-first], mining out from walls of burrows, so fortress not so
kastar [block-square], instead more sazirkib [bridge-netted].
	Minkot just brought to my attention that Bim had a baby by
lye-maker Fath before he died, born just before the latest goblin
theif baby snatcher was dispatched.  Her name is Dastot Blotdoor,
devoted to Ad Loafcleared the Soapy House, of hospitality.  I hope
Bim finds hospitality as a single mother.
	Finished clearing soapmaker area above hospital, and planned
it out, built soapmaker’s shop and ashery.
	Need to link and flood hospital cistern.  [Done badly.]
	Laid out boundaries of shelter burrow for emergencies,
including all its levels and levers.
	Should dig out a level below the farms entirely for prepared meals.
Or, create piles in all the bedroom areas to distribute them.

Slate.  Aban and Datan have a baby girl!  Kulet Walledsandaled,
devoted to Ral of minerals.  That makes 85 dwarves in the village.
	Fath Lenstome created an artifact rose quartz cage,
“Fillriddled the Deep Summit”, with images of crescent moons.
Maybe we can put the vampire in it for ever once she outlives her
usefulness.
	Here’s a lesson learned: create a drawbridge against the
river, and create a drawbridge to tap each water tunnel, instead of
mining into the tunnel and hoping it falls down stairs fast enough.

Felsite.  I’ve screwed up just about everything.  First I mined into
the water tunnel, without being able to control the flow.  Then I had
the vampire in place to be drowned, and foolishly ordered her to mine
until she died, which made her pick up equipment, which made her go on
break.  Now she’s been seen as a vampire, I don’t know if we will be
able to get her back under control again.  Meanwhile walling up the
hospital, which is about to be flooded as high as the river, which is
above the highest level of the hospital burrow.  She returned to
station, so I walled her up behind microcline in the soon-to-be-
flooded hospital burrow.  She killed the miner Deduk, father of
young Ònul—her second very useful dwarf killed, and a father as well.
Going to keep her on station until there is water on the other side of
those block pillars.  If she tantrums and tearn them down when we
release her from duty, she will [not] drown herself.  Clearing every-
thing out of the hospital area.  The wall to seal it off is suspended
until it’s clear or the water rises.
	Lost Aban—what is going to happen to her baby, alone in the
cavern [with a broken skull], mother and father dead?  Set up a burrow
outside the cavern.
	Elven caravan arrived.  Offer what few gems we have cut to
make amends.  While the cavern appears safe, mine all the gems,
so we have more to trade.  Use the empty exchange chamber to
cut gems, and make and encrust mechanisms.  Ùshrir won’t be able
to broker while he’s unconscious from the afteraffects of battle.
Appointed Litast Trustedbolted, clothier to be the broker.
	Finished the bridge to seal off the delve deeper than the cavern.
We have a hatch cover ready.  Said a miner should start a stair shaft.

Hematite.  We could apply 2 hatch covers, since the water has not
risen too high.  But not on the current diagonals.  Wall up the corner
stairs by well.
	Actually found some water in the cavern.  Eshtân Cryptrubbed
was killed in the cavern by a troglodyte, so we need some more
defenses there.
	Ineth and Lorbam have a baby boy!  Mesthos Overtrumpet,
dedicated to Kodor the dominant lilac of light, the sun, and day.
	Vabôk and Mosus have a baby girl!  Unib Windyposts,
devoted to Litast of valor, war, and fortresses.
	Who elected the vampire as our mayor?
	Told Vucar to really concentrate on diagnosing and treating
dwarves, even though we disassembled our hospital.
	Datan has been possessed, and claimed a jeweler’s workshop.
	We have plenty of underground seeds; we should build another
farm in soil.
	We should replace the shelter leatherworks with a bowyer, since
we now have a leatherworks below the trade depot.  Or, set up a bowyer,
carpenter, and wood burner near cavern to process its logs, and a
plant-storage and processing area, or just brewing and carpentry.  TODO

Malachite.  Outline a big open area in the cavern for refuse, to not
carry it all the way up to the surface.  Had Likot figure out where
best to build walls to seal off a production area in the cavern.
This gives us a drink source other than the surface.  Enough area will
be sealed off by walls to farm as well.
	Dôbar and Îton had a second daughter!  Meng Scourring, devoted of
Ôsed Cometmirrored the Zeal of Robustness of wind and trickery.
That makes 93 dwarves in our town.
	Aban’s baby Kulet was found dead in the cavern, all on its own.
Deep distress in this mother’s heart.

Galena.  Appoint Mûthkat Royalarches to broker.  Receiving a human
caravan from Wishogil.  Sell them mugs, cut gems, and worn clothing.
	Asked Zas and Zuglar to figure out what’s going on with the water.
Plan to turn their spillway into a farm on level 10.
	Permitted collection of armor and weapons from fallen foes.
	Datan’s possession has gone too far.  Trying to isolate him in
the gem and mechanic shop on 52.  That didn’t work.  Send the
military.

Limestone.  On the recommendation of spouses Zas and Zuglar,
restoring the hospital and soapmaker levels.
	Mûthkat finally made it to the depot, after drinking and
sleeping and pasturing a large animal.  Traded well and released.
	Construct a dining room and meeting hall below the hospital,
with smoothed floors and engraved walls.

Sandstone.  Fath and Bëmbul had another baby girl!  Dodók Axecrew is
dedicated to Stettad of wealth.

