Production orders by Shorast Coloredmined, embark expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Granite.  The first layer of the embark shelter will be trade,
food, and capentry.  The second will be a general stockpile, to unload
the wagon(s), and the third will be for the stonedwarves.
	Laid out a general store for shelter: seven lines of food and sundries,
two for a hospital, four for defense.  Let the other wagons be collected,
as the miners dig out the water tunnel, small cistern, stonedwarves burrow,
and farm burrow, all stacked in our embark shelter.

Slate.  4 plots and kitchen, still, farmer’s; carpenter’s; trade depot;
jeweler’s, mason’s, mechanic’s; crafter’s; wood furnace, smelter, and
forge.

Felsite.  Ran out of ordinary rock, so mined a frame, found rough red
zircon.  Told miner/mason Eshtân Auraquakes to cut gems, and wood-
worker/carpenter Èrith Shieldbelts to make charcoal and smelt ore.

Hematite summer.  Migrants to relieve Eshtân as mason and jeweler,
and Zasit as fisherdwarf and fish cleaner.  Set up a fishery by the river.

Malachite.  Mining galena hematite, and native copper.

Galena.  Rakust Pulleydriven seemed a competent swordsdwarf.
Returned Eshtân to masonry and stone detailing, to make a coffin.

Limestone.  Built six nest boxes for poultry.

Sandstone.  Finally cleared the path to the well.


Production orders by Ïngiz Diamondfolded, first-migrant planter, The Folded Banner.

253 Sandstone.  Stonedwarf Edëm can mine and craft rock pots and mugs,
and will have to be our mason (we need coffins), mechanic, and jeweler.
Èrith can cut wood and do carpentry, burn wood and smelt ore.
If Ber wakes, will have to do something more useful than tan or weave:
probably broker, and help out Edëm with mechanisms and cutting gems.
If Mebzuth recovers, she can broker, and maybe light work at the fishery.
Vabôk can farm, fish, butcher, and tan.  I can farm, cook, and dye.


Production orders by Ber Paintsqueezed, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Sandstone.  Rebuilding trade depot, still, and farmer’s workshop.

Timber.  Migrants: two soldiers (which we dearly need), woodcrafter,
and animal trainer.  Vabôk will also gather plants and brew.


Production orders by Vabôk Flukecobalt, first-migrant expedition leader, The Folded Banner.

253 Timber.  Got a still working, to drink as we die and rot.

Moonstone.  General orders to gather plants, farm, brew, and cook,
to keep us alive a while.  Ùshrir wil keep books and broker.

Opal.  All orders for farmer’s workshop.  Start preparing easy and
fine meals.

Obsidian.  Meeting area, with people and animals gathered around,
makes it difficult to rebuild nearby buildings.

254 Granite.  Third wave of 28 migrants: miner, wood cutter (to be
carpenter/wood burner), stoneworker (also miner), blacksmith etc.,
jeweler, gem cutter (also miner/furnace operator), 2 bone carver,
clothier, 2 leather workers (1 mechanic/miner), cook, 2 fishery
workers, fish dissector, fisherdwarf, grower, 3 farmers, 2 brewers,
lye maker, spinner, tanner, engineer, and two children.

Slate.  Plenty of bone around; create butcher’s workshop; reuse
craftsdwarf’s workshop; plan trade burrow.  Build press and quern
for miller, leatherworks and tanner’s workshop for leatherworker,
all in top level of shelter.

Felsite.  Tell the kitchen not to cook away the drinks distilled from
aboveground plants.

Hematite.  The blacksmith will burn wood.
	Fourth wave of migrants: ranger, jack-of-all-trades, bone
doctor, metalsmith, gem setter, fish cleaner, farmer, beekeeper,
mechanic.

Malachite.  Bone carvers can also burn wood.  Smith leather and copper
helms and armor.  Make pig iron bars for steel, since we found some flux.
Craft rock mugs for trade.  Still need bags to e.g. mill plants.

Limestone.  Smoothing a hospital burrow, digging a new small cistern.
Make more bolts for hunters, to supplement our meager supply
of meat, and so the marksdwarves have something to shoot with.
But out of copper bars.  Found honeybee colony, ordered beehive
for mead.  Trim bar production to (pig) iron/steel for armor and edged
weapons, silver for war hammer and mace, and copper for bolts. 
Should start a clothing industry to employ the clothier.

Sandstone.  Fifth wave of migrants: miner, craftsdwarf, clothier,
weaver, 2 farmers, beekeeper, presser, thresher, wood burner,
siege engineer, and 2 children.
	Minkot reports 34 chicks and 13 ducklings, eventually for meat,
at least those not kept to breed.  They are decimating the grass of
their pasture, so we'll have to rotate their pasture, possibly outside
the defensive wall.
	My daughter Iden created an artifact hematite grate,
“The Odors of Amusement”!  It will also go into artifact storage.
	Who’s idle and why?  Probably temporary, between jobs:
miner, hunter, militia captain.  Checked workshops for jeweler,
wood burner, mechanic; farmer, brewer, cook, thresher, butcher
and leatherworker.  Workshops needed for clothier, weaver,
spinner, and beekeeper.

Moonstone.  From the metalsmith order silver maces and warhammers,
lead chains and sarcophagi, and copper bolts, mail shirts, and helms.
Finally ran out of barrels from our embark, so set the carpenter to
barrels and the craftsdwarf to rock pots.  Finally thought to let
haulers gather refuse from outside, to process skeletons into bone
bolts and helms, and shell helms.

Obsidian.  Idle jeweler can mine, bone carver can butcher,
brewer can gather plants and farm.
	Ordered querns and beds for the new underground farm.
Set clothes-makers near cavern, and soap-makers below hospital
(rebember not many non-hospital levels with access to the well).
	Restricted marble for use as flux.  Should devote copper to
(bismuth if we had it) bronze.  Ordered smelter to produce steel,
pig iron, iron; bonze from ores and bars, brass; electrum from ores;
silver and lead from galena.  Forge silver war hammer, mace;
{bronze crossbow, bolts, spear, battle axe, mail shirt, helm, and pick};
[lead chain, sarcophagus].


255 Granite.  Ordered leather armor and helms from tanned hides.
Placed hive.
	Migrants: Also wood cutter, wax worker, fishery worker, fish
dissector, 2 farmers, milker, shearer, and a child.  Reassign broker
administration to Kûbuk Canyontomes?  No, no other appraiser.
	Fath is fey in the jeweler’s workshop screaming for plant cloth
(order loom to weave a cloth from pig tail or rope reed thread),
silk cloth (cave spider silk cloth), rough gems (has rose quartz), and
bones (not from roosters; try bull and yak bull).
	Digging out a level below the trade depot to create trade items:
carpenter’s workshop (splints), leatherworks (quivers, water skins,
backpack), craftsdwarf’s workshop (bracelets, toys, amulets), farmer’s
workshop (thread), a pile for copper battle axes, and a clothier’s
shop (handwear, footwear).  Each craft level should have 3 beds,
3 input 3x3 piles, 3 workshops, and 3 output piles (1x9 for each
trading civilization).
	Libash Fencelightnings became a legendary woodcutter!
Now only hauls wood.

Slate.  More migrants: animal dissector, armorer, 2 gem setters,
craftsdwarf, 3 farmers, beekeeper, lye maker, tanner, clerk, child.
Yet more migrants: bowyer, jeweler, butcher, lye maker, siege
engineer.  Should plan bowyer’s workshop as part of dedicated
outdoor-activity burrow near animals.  Include bowyer, carpenter,
kennel, leatherworker, butcher (outside, or with walled-off channel to
outside), tanner, farmer’s workshop to process plant and spin thread
from animals, and appropriate piles and bedrooms.  TODO
	Dig out the center of a frame to store metals near the charcoal-
fueled workshops.  Move ash to the metal bars, and build a kiln to
refine the gypsum powder.

Felsite.  Mine gems and collect webs from the cavern, weave cloth
since we don’t have a hospital to use the thread.
	Store production metal bars in the top mine frame near the
shallow stonedwarves in the shelter burrow, since they are only
temporarily in that form, and look better sorted.  Replace metal bar
pile with ash pile, and build bowyer in place of ash pile. TODO

Hematite.  Built butcher, tanner, leatherworker near refuse in cavern.
Built still near plant and dwarven-drink pile in cavern.

Malachite.  Migrants: ranger, 2 animal dissectors, weaponsmith,
leatherworker, 2 fishery workers, fish cleaner, farmer, potash maker,
tanner.

Galena.  Planned out another farm on level 1.  Don’t cook seeds,
brewable plants, alcohol, or tallow.

Limestone.  Slaughter the yaks, since the pasture is not big enough,
we don’t intend on breeding them, and don’t really need their milk.
	Construct 5 beds for doctors in level 4, 4 beds for farmers in
level 1, and 4 for gem cutters and mechanics in level 52.  Since we
need many more beds, construct carpenter by still on level 54.
	We have many times more work to do than we have dwarves.
Legendary dwarves only haul items related to their legendary jobs.

Stone hauled by miners, stoneworkers, metalsmiths, jewelers,
stonecrafters, and engineers.  Wood hauled by woodworkers, wood
burners, and woodcrafters.  Items, burial, and food hauled by
everyone.  Refuse hauled by soldier, hunter, farmer, fisher, and
bonecrafters.  Furniture hauled by stoneworkers, woodworkers,
metalsmiths, jewelers, stonecrafters, woodcrafters, and engineers.
Animals hauled by hunters, farmers, fishers, and bonecrafters.
Vehicles pushed or hauled by content.  TODO manager diary

	all: item, burial, food
	soldiers: refuse
	miners: stone
	stoneworkers: stone, furniture
	woodworkers: wood, furniture
	hunters: refuse, animals
	metalsmiths: stone, furniture
	jewelers: stone, furniture
	stonecrafters: stone, furniture
	woodcrafters: wood, furniture
	bonecrafters: refuse, animals
	fisherdwarves: refuse, animals
	farmer: refuse, animals
	wood burner: wood
	engineers: stone, furniture

