nb dwarf direction sense

Dwarves speak of location relative to gates, entry points, the first
space where an area was entered, which provide passage back to the
place they were before.  For a fortress, the first gate is the place
near where the wagon stopped, where they first struck the earth.
For a level of the fortress, the level gate is the location of the
first stairway down or up to the level, or the entry point first
carved from outside.  In avuzsazirmafol, they further name their
burrows by the ore of the vein that leads to a frame/chamber/burrow,
since every mineral, and especially metals, have strong and distinct
appearances, smells, and tastes to dwarves.  If there are more than
one vein of the same economic stone, or if the level is completely
composed of it (eg, marble by caverns) then they distinguish them by
relative direction to or from the mountainhome, and left or right from
the path towards the mountainhome.

So an address inside the fortress is composed of the level of the
fortress down from the first gate, the name of the vein that leads to
the frame/chamber/burrow, and (if necessary) a direction to
distinguish it from another, similar vein.  Since the human overseer
doesn’t have the same sense of direction, he uses north as “home”,
towards the mountainhome; south as “away”; and left as “left” and
right as“right” from that axis.  For long passages through many veins,
replace as many directions as possible with a list of the veins in series.

For example, in this picture of the 4th level of Earthenunited,ⁱ the
address of the barracks along the upper hematite vein is “4 hematite
home” (4 hem^), or 4 Hematite North, as we would say.  Proceeding
clockwise: The future frame to the upper right will have the address
“4 galena-right” (4 gal>), or 4 Galena Northeast.  The artifact chamber
is just “4” (4), since it is hard by the gate with no vein between.
The future frame to the lower right will be “4 microcline” (4 mic).
The frame below and slightly left is “4 hematite away” (4 hemv).
The hospital’s address is “4 copper” (4 cop).  The chamber between
them, part of a burrow that starts upstairs, does not have an address
on this level, since it is not accessible.  Clockwise, the future frames
to the upper left will be “4 galena-left left” (4 gal< <) and “4 galena-
left home” (4 gal< ^ in note-shorthand.)
 ⁱ web https://github.com/catenate/dfort/blob/master/forts/Earthenunited/pic/255-4.jpg

To get from the lower-right future frame to the upper-left leftmost
future frame, the directions would be “microcline galena-left left”
(mic gal< <).  To get up to the outside farm would be “microcline
galena hematite-home 3” (mic gal hem^ 3), to find and use the stairs
to the third level past the hematite vein.


nb economic stone abbrev

raw ADAmantine goes in the vault

iron ores and flux stone (no blocks, reserved economic stone):
HEMatite, LIMonite, MAGnetite; LIMEstone, DOLomite, CHAlk, MARble, CALcite

other armor and weapon ores (bismuth bronze, bronze, copper, silver):
SILver/COPper nuggets, MALachite, GALena, TETrahedrite, HORN silver; OBSidian

alloy ores: GARnierite, GOLD nuggets, SPHalerite, CASsiterite, BISmuthinite

fuel: bituminous COAL, LIGnite.

rough gems and glass: by first three letters of name.

plaster: GYPsum, ALAbaster, SELenite, SATinspar.

sand bags and clay: by first three letters of color of sand:
YELlow, WHIte, BLAck, RED, TAN.

2x magma-safe stone: SANdstone, CHErt, GABbro, BASalt, OBSidian,
QUArtzite, TALC, petrified WOOD, PERiclase, ILMenite, RUTile,
CHRomite, PITchblende, BAUxite, OLIvine, KAOlinite, ORThoclase, MICA,
ANHydrite, ALUnite
